202: p 11  CHAPTER I
439: p 65  CHAPTER II
446: Covenant is one of the leading conceptions of the Old Testament, and thus it is not surprising that the early Christians sought to interpret the new faith, in part at least, along the lines of this conception, all the more so since some of the prophets had envisaged a day when there would be a new covenant to replace the old. Of the thirty-three occurrences of the word διαθήκη in the New Testament sixteen refer to the new covenant and a seventeenth speaks of ‘two covenants’ contrasting the old with the new (Gal. 4:24). Of the sixteen, six refer to ‘the blood of the covenant’ (or similar phrase) (Mt. 26:28; Mk. 14:24; Lk. 22:20; 1 Cor. 11:25; Heb. 9:20; 10:29), thus reminding us of the relevance of this subject to the discussion of the atonement, two refer to the new covenant as a ‘better covenant’ (Heb. 7:22; 8:6), four bring out the specific note of the fulfilment of prophecy in the new covenant (Rom. 11:27; Heb. 8:8, 10; 10:16), one is a baffling reference to ‘the ark of his covenant’ in heaven (Rev. 11:19), while the remaining three are more general (2 Cor. 3:6; Heb. 9:15; 12:24).
483: The blood is seen by some as the means of entering into blood brotherhood, a point of view which is well expressed by Trumbull: ‘And now observe the celebration of the symbolic rite of the blood-covenant between the Lord and the Lord’s people, with the substitute blood accepted on both sides, and with the covenant record agreed upon.’ Or again: ‘When united Israel was to be inducted into the privileges of this covenant of blood-friendship at Mount Sinai, half of the blood came from the one party, and half of the blood came from the other party, to the sacred compact; both portions being supplied from a common and a mutually accepted symbolic substitute’. According to this view the blood is essentially the same as that used in the making of blood brothers. But whereas, originally at any rate, in the establishment of this bond the brothers shared each other’s blood, on Mt. Sinai a mutually acceptable substitute provided the blood for both parties (such a provision of a substitute is not unknown in other cases). This view stresses the closeness of the kinship between the two parties to the agreement, but it falls down at critical points. Thus there is nothing in the narrative to indicate that the blood was thought of by either party as a substitute for his or the other’s blood; the idea has to be imported into the story. Again, it gives rise to the concept of an equality of the partners which does not appear to be justified. M. Buber’s summary of the position is better   p 75  when he says: ‘YHVH unites himself with Israel into a political, theo-political unity, “within which the two partners bear the relations towards each other of a primitive wandering community and its melek”.’ Throughout the chapter there is no question but that Yahweh is directing all things. It is His will that the covenant should come about, and it is established on His terms. There is no idea that the people are acting independently.
598: Although Paul does not use the category of covenant as fully as does the writer to the Hebrews, he can yet give expression to essentially the same thought, as when he speaks of ‘ministers of a new covenant; not of the letter, but of the spirit’, goes on to point out that ‘the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life’, and contrasts ‘the ministration of condemnation’ with ‘the ministration of righteousness’ (2 Cor. 3:6ff.). Here again we have the old way contrasted with the new, and the new is thought of as immeasurably superior to the old. It is one of Paul’s leading ideas that before Christ men struggled to serve God by the way of the law, but that now it is the way of grace that has been revealed. Thus in Galatians   p 101  3 he argues vehemently that the way of approach to God is the way of promise or grace; definitely it is not the way of law. It is true that in this chapter (and in others) he reasons that Abraham received the blessing, but he presses home his point that he did so because of his faith. This becomes another point in favour of his thesis that not law but grace is the way. His thought is that God has always accepted men by grace, and the way of approach by law was never valid. The law he regards as of divine origin, but as limited in scope. It was no more than a schoolmaster to bring men to Christ. The covenant associated with the giving of the law was thus immeasurably less than the new covenant which makes it abundantly plain that the way is by grace and through faith. There can be no doubt that he would have accepted the thought of Hebrews 9:15 that the death of Christ availed for the transgressions committed under the first covenant, for he is positive that the one way of putting away sin is through the work of Jesus Christ. It is clear that for Paul, as for the writer to the Hebrews and, indeed, for all the New Testament writers, the new way transforms everything. It is infinitely better than the old way.
602: We see the same tendency towards associating the new covenant   p 103  with forgiveness of sin in St. Paul’s only reference to the new covenant as having been foretold. Thus he quotes Isaiah as follows: ‘There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer; he shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob: and this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins’ (Rom. 11:26f.). There is no particular difficulty about the first part of this quotation which is a rather free citation of Isaiah 59:20 (LXX). But the words about forgiveness of sin are not to be found in this passage; they come from Isaiah 27:9. Here we see at work, and in a more striking form, the same process we have already noted in Hebrews. Paul is writing about the covenant, and as he wishes to express its essence, he adds to his citation from Isaiah 59:20 other words, separated in the original by many chapters, but which bring out the central truth expressed by the new covenant.
607: It is, of course, just possible that the New Testament references to ‘the blood of the covenant’ point back to Zechariah 9:11, rather than to Exodus 24:8, and Vincent Taylor cites Joachim Jeremias as an exegete who adopts this interpretation. Twice in the Rabbinic literature the blood of the Passover victim is spoken of as ‘covenant-blood’, Zechariah 9:11 being interpreted of the deliverance of Israel from Egypt. Jeremias thinks that Jesus (who had this chapter of Zechariah in mind during His last days, as we see from Mt. 21:5) was comparing His blood to that of the Passover lamb at the departure from Egypt. He maintains that Jesus is describing ‘His death as an atoning death which establishes the new and eternal communion of a humanity cleansed from sin with its God—the communion of the Kingdom of God’. I agree with Dr. Taylor that this is not as probable as a reference to Exodus 24:8, but, as the words last quoted show, even if Jeremias’ view be accepted, the significance of the covenant-blood is much the same. It still remains true that it is the means of cleansing and that it brings men into communion with God.
621: The same thing follows from the fact that the new covenant is modelled on that of Exodus 24. Whatever may be said about covenants in general it cannot be denied that the blood of the victim was necessary in that rite. If the new covenant is derived from the old, it may well be argued that the death of Christ is a necessary part of the process accordingly. The same, too, would follow from the repeated references to ‘the blood of the covenant’, for, as we shall see in the next chapter, blood in the Scripture must be understood of the infliction of death. The fact that the blood of the covenant is met with on several occasions shows that it was not regarded as a non-essential but as a very important part of the process.
644: p 112  CHAPTER III
