129: When the present writer first began to read seriously on the atonement he discovered that some of the great theological words such as ‘redemption’, ‘propitiation’, and ‘justification’ are often used in a way which seems to indicate that they mean different things to different people. If we may take redemption, the subject of our opening chapter, as an example, some writers, as we there point out, practically equate it with deliverance; others see in it a reference to a substitutionary transaction; while others use it as a comprehensive term for the whole Christian salvation. For some it has a backward reference, pointing to the satisfaction for sin made on the cross, while for others it is essentially forward-looking and gives expression to the liberation from sin’s bondage which enables the believer to live the Christ-like life. There is similar uncertainty and ambiguity attaching to the use of some other terms.
137: Many friends have assisted me at various points, and it is difficult to acknowledge all my indebtedness. But especially would I mention the Rev. Dr. Newton Flew, who discussed many of these chapters with me, the late Rev. H. W. Oldham, who advised me constantly during the earlier part of my labours, and also my colleague, Mr. F. I. Andersen, who has very kindly compiled the Index. Finally, I would like to place on record my gratitude to the publishers for all the help they have given during the various stages of production.
150: The demand for a new edition has given me the opportunity of revising the book throughout. Many of the alterations are merely verbal, but there have been one or two substantial changes. The arrangement of the material has been altered here and there, notably in the opening chapter, where there has been a rather radical rearrangement. I have also taken advantage of the opportunity to include a certain amount of new material, notably the new chapter IV, ‘The Lamb of God’, and the section on ἱλαστήριον in chapter VI on ‘Propitiation’. This latter has previously appeared in New Testament Studies, II, No. 1, and I am grateful to the editors for permission to republish it here.
202: p 11  CHAPTER I
211: I. ETYMOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
226: II. THE USE OF ἀπολύτρωσις
240: III. THE JEWISH BACKGROUND
280: IV. REDEMPTION IN RABBINIC WRITINGS
292: V. THE λύτρον WORD-GROUP IN THE NEW TESTAMENT
368: VI. THE USE OF ἀγοράζω
380: VII. THE USE OF ἐξαγοράζω
439: p 65  CHAPTER II
444: I. INTRODUCTION
483: The blood is seen by some as the means of entering into blood brotherhood, a point of view which is well expressed by Trumbull: ‘And now observe the celebration of the symbolic rite of the blood-covenant between the Lord and the Lord’s people, with the substitute blood accepted on both sides, and with the covenant record agreed upon.’ Or again: ‘When united Israel was to be inducted into the privileges of this covenant of blood-friendship at Mount Sinai, half of the blood came from the one party, and half of the blood came from the other party, to the sacred compact; both portions being supplied from a common and a mutually accepted symbolic substitute’. According to this view the blood is essentially the same as that used in the making of blood brothers. But whereas, originally at any rate, in the establishment of this bond the brothers shared each other’s blood, on Mt. Sinai a mutually acceptable substitute provided the blood for both parties (such a provision of a substitute is not unknown in other cases). This view stresses the closeness of the kinship between the two parties to the agreement, but it falls down at critical points. Thus there is nothing in the narrative to indicate that the blood was thought of by either party as a substitute for his or the other’s blood; the idea has to be imported into the story. Again, it gives rise to the concept of an equality of the partners which does not appear to be justified. M. Buber’s summary of the position is better   p 75  when he says: ‘YHVH unites himself with Israel into a political, theo-political unity, “within which the two partners bear the relations towards each other of a primitive wandering community and its melek”.’ Throughout the chapter there is no question but that Yahweh is directing all things. It is His will that the covenant should come about, and it is established on His terms. There is no idea that the people are acting independently.
504: III. THE IDEA OF COVENANT IN JUDAISM
530: IV. διαθήκη IN THE SEPTUAGINT
538: V. διαθήκη IN NON-BIBLICAL GREEK
554: VI. διαθήκη IN THE NEW TESTAMENT
597: 1. The auctor ad Hebraeos explicitly speaks of the new as a ‘better covenant’ (Heb. 7:22; 8:6) and goes on to point out that ‘if that first had been faultless, then would no place have been sought for a second’ (Heb. 8:7). He proceeds to quote Jeremiah’s prophecy of the new covenant, significantly introducing it with the words, ‘For finding fault with them, he saith’ (Heb. 8:8). He brings this section to a close by saying: ‘In that he saith, A new covenant, he hath made the first old. But that which is becoming old and waxeth aged is nigh unto vanishing away’ (Heb. 8:13). There can be no question but what he conceived of the old covenant as having served its purpose and of having now passed into disuse, being replaced by the new relationship made possible by the work of Jesus Christ. He enlarges upon this in chapter nine.
598: Although Paul does not use the category of covenant as fully as does the writer to the Hebrews, he can yet give expression to essentially the same thought, as when he speaks of ‘ministers of a new covenant; not of the letter, but of the spirit’, goes on to point out that ‘the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life’, and contrasts ‘the ministration of condemnation’ with ‘the ministration of righteousness’ (2 Cor. 3:6ff.). Here again we have the old way contrasted with the new, and the new is thought of as immeasurably superior to the old. It is one of Paul’s leading ideas that before Christ men struggled to serve God by the way of the law, but that now it is the way of grace that has been revealed. Thus in Galatians   p 101  3 he argues vehemently that the way of approach to God is the way of promise or grace; definitely it is not the way of law. It is true that in this chapter (and in others) he reasons that Abraham received the blessing, but he presses home his point that he did so because of his faith. This becomes another point in favour of his thesis that not law but grace is the way. His thought is that God has always accepted men by grace, and the way of approach by law was never valid. The law he regards as of divine origin, but as limited in scope. It was no more than a schoolmaster to bring men to Christ. The covenant associated with the giving of the law was thus immeasurably less than the new covenant which makes it abundantly plain that the way is by grace and through faith. There can be no doubt that he would have accepted the thought of Hebrews 9:15 that the death of Christ availed for the transgressions committed under the first covenant, for he is positive that the one way of putting away sin is through the work of Jesus Christ. It is clear that for Paul, as for the writer to the Hebrews and, indeed, for all the New Testament writers, the new way transforms everything. It is infinitely better than the old way.
602: We see the same tendency towards associating the new covenant   p 103  with forgiveness of sin in St. Paul’s only reference to the new covenant as having been foretold. Thus he quotes Isaiah as follows: ‘There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer; he shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob: and this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins’ (Rom. 11:26f.). There is no particular difficulty about the first part of this quotation which is a rather free citation of Isaiah 59:20 (LXX). But the words about forgiveness of sin are not to be found in this passage; they come from Isaiah 27:9. Here we see at work, and in a more striking form, the same process we have already noted in Hebrews. Paul is writing about the covenant, and as he wishes to express its essence, he adds to his citation from Isaiah 59:20 other words, separated in the original by many chapters, but which bring out the central truth expressed by the new covenant.
607: It is, of course, just possible that the New Testament references to ‘the blood of the covenant’ point back to Zechariah 9:11, rather than to Exodus 24:8, and Vincent Taylor cites Joachim Jeremias as an exegete who adopts this interpretation. Twice in the Rabbinic literature the blood of the Passover victim is spoken of as ‘covenant-blood’, Zechariah 9:11 being interpreted of the deliverance of Israel from Egypt. Jeremias thinks that Jesus (who had this chapter of Zechariah in mind during His last days, as we see from Mt. 21:5) was comparing His blood to that of the Passover lamb at the departure from Egypt. He maintains that Jesus is describing ‘His death as an atoning death which establishes the new and eternal communion of a humanity cleansed from sin with its God—the communion of the Kingdom of God’. I agree with Dr. Taylor that this is not as probable as a reference to Exodus 24:8, but, as the words last quoted show, even if Jeremias’ view be accepted, the significance of the covenant-blood is much the same. It still remains true that it is the means of cleansing and that it brings men into communion with God.
615: VII. CONCLUSION
621: The same thing follows from the fact that the new covenant is modelled on that of Exodus 24. Whatever may be said about covenants in general it cannot be denied that the blood of the victim was necessary in that rite. If the new covenant is derived from the old, it may well be argued that the death of Christ is a necessary part of the process accordingly. The same, too, would follow from the repeated references to ‘the blood of the covenant’, for, as we shall see in the next chapter, blood in the Scripture must be understood of the infliction of death. The fact that the blood of the covenant is met with on several occasions shows that it was not regarded as a non-essential but as a very important part of the process.
644: p 112  CHAPTER III
652: I. ‘BLOOD’ IN THE OLD TESTAMENT
